Blade Runner is a 1982 American neo-noir science fiction film directed by Ridley Scott and starring Harrison Ford, Rutger Hauer, Sean Young, and Edward James Olmos. The film, written by Hampton Fancher and David Peoples, is a loose adaptation[6][7] of the 1968 novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? by Philip K. Dick. The film depicts a dystopian Los Angeles in which genetically engineered replicants, which are visually indistinguishable from adult humans, are manufactured by the powerful Tyrell Corporation to work on off-world colonies. Those that escape and return to Earth are hunted down and "retired" by special police operatives known as Blade Runners. The story focuses on burnt-out expert Blade Runner Rick Deckard (Ford), who reluctantly agrees to take on one more assignment to hunt down a group of recently escaped replicants led by Roy Batty (Hauer). During his investigations, Deckard meets Rachael (Young), an advanced replicant who causes him to question the replicants' humanity.
Blade Runner initially polarized critics; some were displeased with the pacing, while others praised its thematic complexity and visuals. The year following its release, the film won the prestigious Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation. Blade Runner underperformed in North American theaters, but has since become a cult film.[8] Hailed for its production design, depicting a "retrofitted" future,[9] it remains a leading example of the neo-noir genre.[10] The film's soundtrack, composed by Vangelis, was critically acclaimed and nominated in 1983 for a BAFTA and Golden Globe as best original score. The film brought the work of Philip K. Dick to the attention of Hollywood and several later films were based on his work.[11] Ridley Scott regards Blade Runner as "probably" his most complete and personal film.[12][13] In 1993, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress, being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". Blade Runner is now regarded by many critics as one of the all-time best science fiction films.

Seven versions of the film have been shown for various markets as a result of controversial changes made by film executives. A director's cut was released in 1992 after a strong response to test screenings of a workprint. This, in conjunction with its popularity as a video rental, made it one of the first films released on DVD—a basic production with mediocre video and audio quality.[14] In 2007, Warner Bros. released The Final Cut, a 25th anniversary digitally remastered version, which is the only one on which Scott had complete artistic freedom[15] and was shown in selected theaters and subsequently released on DVD, HD DVD, and Blu-ray.[16]

A sequel, Blade Runner 2049, is scheduled for release in October 2017.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Plot
2	Cast
3	Themes
4	Production
4.1	Casting
4.2	Development
4.3	Design
4.3.1	Voight-Kampff machine
4.4	Music
4.5	Special effects
5	Release
5.1	Critical reception
5.2	Accolades
5.3	Versions
6	Legacy
6.1	Cultural impact
6.1.1	American Film Institute recognition
6.2	In other media
6.3	Documentaries
7	Sequel
7.1	Books
8	See also
9	Notes
10	References
11	Bibliography
12	External links
